
layout: post
title:  "Introduction to Hibernate"
published: false
categories: [java]
---

Java
- object oriented- fundamental thing is objects - state and behavior to model problems
- persisting objects(state/data they contain) is a fundamental requirement in real world apps
-
- Storing data - we rely on relational databases
- data rep as rows and columns with relationships and associations
- Bringing java objects to relational world is complex and challenging
- Process of doing this is called object relational mapping
-
- we use OO languages for development and relational databases for data storage.
- Results in object-relational impedance mismatch
- mitigated using frameworks.
-
- Java Database Connectivity (JDBC) APi - accessing databases
- Cumbersome for more complex domain models - too much boilerplate
- Hibernate solves these problems
-

Using JDBC; no frameworks
- establishing DB connection - 1st step in any DB application
- JDBC - provides a connection API based on some given DB properties
- DB provides implement a class that holds the database conncetion mechanism
- e.g com.mysql.jdbc.Driver for MySQL among others.
- Becomes untenable quickly:
-  why:
-  complex table relationships make stuff unwieldy
-  boilerpate

Using Hibernate
- Standard steps
- 1. Configure database connection
- 2. Create mapping definitions
- 3. Persist the classes
- or
- create a domain object ( so called POJO )
- create config files and mapping files
- create a client to manage CRUD operations
-
- Heart of any Hibernate application: configuration
- 2 types of config: database connection & object-to-table mapping
- mapping config defines which object properties map to what columns

1. configure DB connection
- Hibernate needs to know DB connection info
- info provided using xml(hibernate.cfg.xml) or text file (hibernate.properties)
- include a mapping property to define a file used for mapping
- config file used to create a sessionFactory for creating sessions
- it's thread safe
- single across the application
- defined for one database
- session object - gateway to the database -
- takes care of all DB operations e.g. saving, loading, retrieving
- database operatins wrapped in transactions - all or nothing single units of work
- Session objects not thread safe - should not be shared across classes.
-

2. Create Mapping definitions.
- done once connection configuration ready.
- done in an xxx.hbm.xml file
- contains object-table mapping definitions
-

3. Persist Objects
- create client manager for persisting objects
- define SessionFactory instance used to create a Session object
- use the session to perform CRUD operations using objects and maybe HQL.
- focus in on business logic, database interaction now fits into the object
- oriented world.
-

why even use ORMs?
- object relational mismatch
- domain model - defines objects rep real-world problem.
- domain objects are what are stored and retrieved from the DB
- relational DBs used for persistence in many real-world apps
- relations dbs - rol-column format
- relationships in form of foreign-keys
- how to store domain obj in relational DBs?
- can't be stored as is, object-relational impedance mismatch.
- Examples:
- inheritance mismatch - supported by objects but not by relational database
- identity mismatch - no identity(==) or equality(equals) concepts in relational schemas.
- relations and associations mismatch - converting object associations (one-to-many etc) to foreign-key/pri-key association challenging.
- ORM tools developed to automate object-relational persistence strategies.
-

Hibernate's Main parts:
1. Persistent classes (POJOs or Annotated Java Objects AJOs)
2. Configuration and mapping defs - which objects to be stored and where
3. Access and data manipulation using the API - CRUD operations

Persistent Classes
- must have a unique identifier
- mapping them to db table done using mapping file.
- Another way - annotations - metadata about a class added to the class at the source level
- Hibernate uses JPA annotations
- JPA - standard specification dictating the persistence of Java objects
-

Configuration
- database info - url, credential, dialects, etc
- this config read by framework to establish db connection
- properties file or xml file.
- hibernate runtime checks classpath and automatically loads default files
-

xml Mapping files
- how to map defined classes to db tables
- can be autogenerated using XDoclet, Middlegen, AndroMDA
- <ClassName>.hbm.xml extension
- provides a way for generating identifiers - each object must hv a unique identifier
-

Session
- session - obtain physical connection to DB
- session object - lightweight, instantiated each time a DB interaction is needed. shouldnt be open for long. not thread safe.
- session - offers CRUD operations for instances of mapped entity classes.
- instances may exist in 3 states:
- a) transient - new instance of persistent class, not associated with session,no representation in db,no identifier value
- b) persistent - a transient instance associated with a session. has a rep in the db, an indentifier value and is associated with a session
- c) detached - when session is closed.
- session factory - created using config data
- transaction - segregates and synchronizes units of work
- ACID properties for transactions - atomicity, consistency, isolation, durability.

  Annotations
  - how map values from classes to tables and associated fields
  - hibernate works best if persistent classes follow simple rules - POJO programming model i.e
  - i) default constructor
  - ii) ID for identification
  - iii) private attributes with getters and setters
  - non final class
  - not extend/implement specialized classes.
  - JavaBeans compliant
  - Example

```java
public class Employee {
   private int id;
   private String firstName;
   private String lastName;
   private int salary;

   public Employee() {}
   public Employee(String fname, String lname, int salary) {
      this.firstName = fname;
      this.lastName = lname;
      this.salary = salary;
   }

   public int getId() {
      return id;
   }

   public void setId( int id ) {
      this.id = id;
   }

   public String getFirstName() {
      return firstName;
   }

   public void setFirstName( String first_name ) {
      this.firstName = first_name;
   }

   public String getLastName() {
      return lastName;
   }

   public void setLastName( String last_name ) {
      this.lastName = last_name;
   }

   public int getSalary() {
      return salary;
   }

   public void setSalary( int salary ) {
      this.salary = salary;
   }
}
```

- instead of a mapping element and .hbm.xml file in yr xxx.cfg.xml file, use config.addAnnotatedClass method
- annotatations used: Entity, Column, etc
- decorate source classes with metadata
- anything done with xml mapping can be done with annotation.
-

Persisting Collections.
- collectons - List, Maps, Set, Array, etc
- persisting lists - ordered elements - hibernate uses a sep table with indices for ordering

Associations
- we use attributes to form associations between objects in java
- relationships - associations between relational data tables
- expressed using pri/foreign keys + other constraints
- key concepts in associations: multiplicity and directionality
- Multiplicity:
- how many of specific objects related to how many of other objects e.g one-one, one-many, many-many
- Directionality:
- direction an association is tending
- unidirectional or bidirectional
- unidirectional/one-sided - reference of target in source but not other way around.
- bidiectional - reference in both source and target objects
- direction + multiplicity
- e.g. a Student class referencing a List of Courses and a Course class referencing a List of students

One-to-One Association.
- 2 ways of establishing this: foreign key or primary key
- one 2 one bidrectional association - make a reference of Target in Source and vice-versa.
- annotate the reference using @OneToOne & @JoinColumn in source and @OneToOne in target.
- Both tables exhibit one-one relatioship by sharing the same primary key.
- 
-
